Pop star, composer, songwriter, and recording artist John Winston Lennon was born on 9 October 1940, in Liverpool, Merseyside, NW England, UK, during a German air raid in World War II.

When he was four years old, Lennon's parents separated and he ended up living with his Aunt Mimi. John's father was a merchant seaman. He was not present at his son's birth and did not see a lot of his son when he was small.

Lennon's mother, Julia, remarried, but visited John and Mimi regularly. She taught John how to play the banjo and the piano and purchased his first guitar. He was devastated when Julia was fatally struck by a car driven by an off-duty police officer in July 1958. Her death was one of the most traumatic events in his life.

As a child, Lennon was a prankster and he enjoyed getting in trouble. As a boy and young adult, Lennon enjoyed drawing grotesque figures and cripples. Lennon's school master thought that he could go to an art school for college, since he did not get good grades in school, but had artistic talent.

At sixteen, Elvis Presley's explosion onto the rock music scene inspired Lennon to create the skiffle band called the 'Quarry Men', named after his school. Lennon met Paul McCartney at a church fete on 6 July 1957. John soon invited Paul to join the group and they eventually formed the most successful songwriting partnership in musical history.

McCartney introduced George Harrison to Lennon the following year and he and art college buddy Stuart Sutcliffe also joined Lennon's band. Always in need of a drummer, the group finally settled on Pete Best in 1960.

The first recording they made was Buddy Holly's 'That'll be the Day' in mid-1958. In fact, it was Holly's group, the Crickets, that inspired the band to change its name. Lennon would later joke that he had a vision when he was 12 years old - a man appeared on a flaming pie and said unto them "from this day on you are Beatles with an 'A.'"

The Beatles were discovered by Brian Epstein in 1961 at the Cavern Club, where they were performing on a regular basis. As their new manager, Epstein secured a record contract with EMI. With a new drummer, Ringo Starr (Richard Starkey), and George Martin as producer, the group released their first single, 'Love Me Do', in October 1962. It peaked on the British charts at number 17.

Lennon wrote the group's follow-up single, 'Please Please Me', inspired primarily by Roy Orbison but also fed by Lennon's infatuation with the pun in Bing Crosby's famous "Please, lend your little ears to my please." The song topped the charts in Britain. The Beatles went on to become the most popular band in Britain with the release of mega-hits like 'She Loves You' and 'I Want To Hold Your Hand'.

In 1964, The Beatles became the first band to break out big in the United States, beginning with their appearance on TV's 'The Ed Sullivan Show' on 9 February 1964. Beatlemania launched a "British Invasion"' of rock bands into the U.S., which included The Rolling Stones and The Kinks. After 'Sullivan,' The Beatles returned to Britain to film their first movie, 'A Hard Day's Night', and prepare for their first world tour.

The Beatles followed up with their second movie 'Help!' in 1965. In June, the Queen of England had announced that the Beatles would be awarded the MBE (Member of the Order of the British Empire). In August, they performed to 55,600 fans at New York's Shea Stadium, setting a record for largest concert audience. When they returned to England, they recorded the breakthrough album 'Rubber Soul', which extended beyond love songs and pop formulas.

The magic of Beatlemania had started to lose its appeal by 1966. The group's lives were put in danger when they were accused of snubbing the presidential family in the Philippines. Then, Lennon's remark that "we're more popular than Jesus now" incited denunciations and Beatles record bonfires in the U.S. bible belt. The Beatles gave up touring after a 29 August 1966 concert at San Francisco's Candlestick Park.

After an extended break, the band returned to the studio to expand their experimental with drug-influenced exotic instrumentation/lyrics and tape abstractions. The first sample was the single 'Penny Lane/Strawberry Fields Forever', followed up by 'Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band', still considered by many to be the greatest rock album ever.

The Beatles then suffered a huge blow when Epstein died of an accidental overdose of sleeping pills on 27 August 1967. Shaken by Epstein's death, the Beatles retrenched under McCartney's leadership in the fall and filmed 'Magical Mystery Tour'. While the film was panned by critics, the soundtrack album contained Lennon's 'I Am The Walrus', their most cryptic work yet.

After the Magical Mystery Tour film failed, the Beatles retreated into Transcendental Meditation and the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, which took them to India for two months in early 1968. Their next effort, Apple Corps Ltd. was plagued by mismanagement. In July, the group faced its last hysterical crowds at the premiere of their film 'Yellow Submarine'. In November, their double-album 'The Beatles' (frequently called the 'White Album') showed their divergent directions.

Lennon had married Cynthia Powell in August 1962 and they had a son together who they called Julian, named after John's mother. Cynthia had to keep a very low profile during Beatlemania. They divorced in 1968 and he re-married Japanese avant-garde artist Yoko Ono, whom he had met at the Indica Gallery in November 1966.

John and Yoko's artist partnership began to cause further tensions within the group. Together they invented a form of peace protest by staying in bed while being filmed and interviewed, and the single recorded under the name of The Plastic Ono Band, 'Give Peace a Chance' (1969), became the national anthem for pacifists.

Lennon left The Beatles in September 1969, just after the group completed recording 'Abbey Road'. The news of the breakup was kept secret until McCartney announced his departure in April 1970, a month before the band released 'Let It Be', recorded just before Abbey Road.

After the Beatles broke up, Lennon released 'Plastic Ono Band', with a raw, minimalist sound that followed "primal-scream" therapy. In 1971, he followed up with 'Imagine', the most commercially successful and critically acclaimed of all John Lennon's post-Beatles efforts. The title track was later listed as the third all-time best song by Rolling Stone magazine.

Peace and love, however, was not always on Lennon's agenda. Imagine also included the track 'How Do You Sleep?', a nasty response to veiled messages at Lennon in some of McCartney's solo recordings. Later, the former songwriting duo buried the hatchet, but never formally worked together again.

Lennon and Ono moved to the U.S. in September 1971, but were constantly threatened with deportation by the Nixon administration. Lennon was told he was being kicked out of the country because of his 1968 marijuana conviction in Britain. But Lennon believed the true reason was his activism against the unpopular Vietnam War. Documents later proved him correct. Two years after Nixon resigned, Lennon was granted permanent U.S. residency in 1976.

In 1972, Lennon performed at Madison Square Garden to benefit mentally handicapped children and continued to promote peace while battling to stay in the U.S. That immigration battle took a toll on the Lennon's marriage and in the fall of 1973, they separated. He went to Los Angeles, where he partied and took a mistress, May Pang. He still managed to release hit albums, such as 'Mind Games', 'Walls and Bridges' and 'Rock and Roll' and collaborate with David Bowie and Elton John.

In the end, Lennon realised he really loved Yoko and could not live without her. They reconciled and she gave birth to their only child, Sean, on Lennon's 35th birthday. Lennon decided to leave the music business to raise his son and become a house husband.

In 1980, Lennon returned to the music world with the album 'Double Fantasy', featuring the hit single '(Just Like) Starting Over'. Unfortunately, just a few weeks after its release, Lennon was shot by a deranged fan in front of his apartment complex in New York. Lennon died of the age of 40 at the Roosevelt Hospital on 8 December 1980, after receiving multiple gun shots in the back.

His death affected millions of people, record sales soared, and he continues to be admired by new generations of fans.


Help! 

A loose semi-spoof of the globe-trotting James Bond pictures, Help! has always been considered a somewhat disorganised comedown from its predecessor; but it presents "the famous Beatles" even more clearly as the English cousins of the Marx Brothers.

Imagine

Brand new 2010 digital remaster of the classic John Lennon album. Considered together, Imagine and its startling predecessor, Plastic Ono Band, paint a vivid picture of the state of John Lennon immediately post-Beatles. 

Working Class Hero - The Definitive Lennon

Some of Lennon's greatest hits on one CD.

John Lennon: The Life: The Definitive Biography by Philip Norman

Early life
John Winston Lennon was born on the evening of 9 October 1940 during the height of Germany's Blitz on Britain. He inherited his mother's reddish-blonde hair and his father's slightly squinted eyes and prominent nose. Both of his parents had musical background and experience, though neither pursued it seriously. John Lennon's childhood years were tinged with tragedy. He lived with his parents in Liverpool until his father Fred Lennon, a merchant seaman, walked out on the family. His mother, Julia, then decided that she was unable to care for John as well as she should and so gave him to her sister, Mimi, who resided nearby at 251 Menlove Avenue. Roles were reversed as the socially class-concious, strict but loving Aunt Mimi became mother to John, while his true mother Julia acted more like a free-willed aunt who visited regularly and spoiled the lad.

Around adolescence, Lennon developed severe myopia, or shortsightedness, and was obliged to wear thick, horn-rimmed glasses in order to see clearly. But only grudgingly did he allow himself to be photographed bespectacled, even though one of his idols, Buddy Holly, wore glasses. During his early Beatle career, Lennon wore contacts or prescription sunglasses, but later finally accepted his fate and donned his trademark, round 'granny-glasses' in late 1966. Many people wear such glasses today, even if they do not actually need them to see. Although John lived apart from his mother he still kept in contact with her through regular visits, and during this time Julia was responsible for introducing her son to a lifelong interest in music by teaching him how to play the banjo. Soon after his 16th birthday, his mother was killed after she was struck by a car which was being driven by a drunken off-duty police officer. This event influenced many of his later songs, and was also one of the factors that cemented his friendship with Paul McCartney, who lost his mother to breast cancer at the age of 14. Later, in 1968, Lennon wrote a song entitled Julia in honour of his mother.

His Aunt Mimi was able to get him accepted into the Liverpool College of Art by showing them some of his drawings, and it was there that he met his future wife, Cynthia Powell. However, John steadily grew to hate the conformity of art school and, like many young men of his age, became increasingly interested in Rock 'n' Roll music and American singers like Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly. Eventually, in the late 1950s, Lennon formed his own skiffle group called The Quarry Men, which later became The Silver Beetles (a tribute to Buddy Holly's Crickets) and soon afterwards was shortened to The Beatles.

He married Cynthia in 1962 after she became pregnant with his child, Julian.


Beatles career

John Lennon
As a member of The Beatles, Lennon had a profound influence on rock and roll and in expanding the genre's boundaries during the 1960s. He is widely considered, along with fellow-writing partner Paul McCartney, as one of the most influential singer-songwriter-musicians of the 20th century. Of the two, Lennon is generally viewed as the better lyricist, while McCartney is seen as the more accomplished composer. Though overly simplistic, this view does have some truth as much of the songs credited to Lennon-McCartney, but actually inspired by Lennon himself are more developed, introspective pieces often in the first-person and dealing with more personal issues. Lennon's lyrics are also often the more lyrical, due to his love of word-play, double-meaning and strange words. His most surreal pieces of songwriting, Strawberry Fields Forever and I Am the Walrus are fine example of his unique style. Lennon's partnership in songwriting with McCartney many times involved him in complementing and counterbalancing McCartney's upbeat, positive outlook with the other side of the coin, as one of their songs, Getting Better demonstrates:

McCartney: I have to admit it's gettin' better, it's gettin' better all the time.

Lennon: It couldn't get much worse!

John Lennon often spoke his mind freely. On March 4, 1966, in an interview for the London Evening Standard with Maureen Cleave, he made the following statement:

'Christianity will go. It will vanish and shrink. I needn't argue with that; I'm right and I will be proved right. We're more popular than Jesus now. I don't know which will go first, rock 'n' roll or Christianity. Jesus was all right, but his disciples were thick and ordinary. It's them twisting it that ruins it for me.'
While the statement is certianly an odd one to make about one of the world's major religions, many view it as taken out of context. It should be noted that, like the other major religions, Christianity has been around for milennia and has shown no hint of decline. Regardless, when read in the proper context of the article, Lennon sounds actually saddened that a rock group such as The Beatles became more important to many people than spirituality. Though the article was unnoticed in the UK, there was a severe backlash by conservative religious groups in the U.S. Radio stations banned the group's recordings, and their albums and other products were burned and destroyed. Spain and the Vatican denounced Lennon's words, and South Africa banned Beatles music from the radio. Lennon seems to have been quite distressed by this row and later admitted that he didn't like having introduced more hate into the world. On August 11, 1966, he held a press conference in Chicago in order to address the growing furor. He told reporters 'I suppose if I had said television was more popular than Jesus, I would have gotten away with it. I'm sorry I opened my mouth. I'm not anti-God, anti-Christ, or anti-religion. I wasn't knocking it or putting it down. I was just saying it as a fact and it's true more for England than here. I'm not saying that we're better or greater, or comparing us with Jesus Christ as a person or God as a thing or whatever it is. I just said what I said and it was wrong. Or it was taken wrong. And now it's all this.'

The Vatican accepted his apology. He was often misquoted as saying 'bigger than Jesus', which led many to believe that he meant that the Beatles were better than Jesus. Whether he thought that (at the time anyway) is not clear, but he certainly did not say that.

On November 9, 1966, after their final tour ended and right after he had wrapped up filming a minor role in the film How I Won the War, Lennon visited an art exhibit of Yoko Ono's at the Indica art gallery in London. The Beatle was impressed by Ono's art, most notably a piece consisting of a small word which could only be read with a magnifying glass from a ladder. The word was 'yes'. 'It was positive!' he enthusiastically told Rolling Stone magazine in 1970. Ono and Lennon, both married, immediately made an impression on each other. They occasionally made contact with each other during the period of Sergeant Pepper and the 'Summer of Love.'

Finally in the spring of 1968, after returning disenchanted from a transcendental meditation retreat in India, Lennon began his love affair with Ono, and revealed the fact to his increasingly estranged wife Cynthia. Cynthia Lennon filed for divorce later that year, while Lennon and Ono from then on were inseperable in public and private, as well as during Beatles recording sessions. This new development led to obvious friction with the other members of the group, and heightened the tension during the 1968 White Album sessions.

Undue blame has been heavily placed on Ono as the sole cause of the group's fracture, as they were already diverging shortly after the death of their manager, Brian Epstein, in 1967. Lennon's immediate reaction to Epstein's death had been, 'The Beatles are finished.' What he saw as misguided leadership from McCartney after this seems to have had a lot to do with the fracture between them.

At the end of 1968, Lennon and Ono performed as Dirty Mac on the The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus.

During his last two years as member of The Beatles, Lennon remained as vocal as ever, spending much of his time with Yoko on public displays speaking out against the Vietnam War, and for peace. He sent back the MBE (Member of the Order of the British Empire) he got from the Queen of England, reportedly 'with love', to protest British support of the Vietnam War and their involvement in African affairs. On March 20, 1969, John Lennon and Yoko Ono were married in Gibraltar, and spent their honeymoon in Amsterdam in a 'bed-in' for peace. John and Yoko followed up their honeymoon with another 'bed-in' for peace this time held in Montreal. During the second 'bed-in' the couple recorded 'Give Peace a Chance'. They were mainly patronized as a couple of eccentrics by the media, but still were important figures in the anti-war movement. Shortly after, John changed his middle name from Winston to Ono to show his 'oneness' with Yoko. Lennon wrote 'The Ballad of John and Yoko' about his marriage and the press's take on it all.

After both being injured in the summer of 1969 in a car accident in Scotland, Lennon arranged for Yoko to be constantly with him in the studio as he recorded his last album with The Beatles, Abbey Road. A full-sized bed was rolled into the studio so that Lennon would not be separated from Ono. Abbey Road was the last polished, united effort by the group, and after its release in the autumn of 1969, it seemed the four members had made a peaceful parting of ways. But the release of the rough, and over-orchestrated 'Let It Be' album in May, 1970 had acrimonious results. Bridges were burnt as an enraged McCartney announced he was quitting the group stating that his approval was not obtained when Phil Spector, at the insistence of Lennon and George Harrison, added overlush orchestration to several of McCartney's pieces. He was even quoted as saying that he was 'sickened' by the 'mutilation' of his music. Though the split would only become legally final some time later, Lennon and McCartney's partnership had come to a bitter end.


Solo career
Of the four former Beatles, Lennon had perhaps the most varied recording career, often reflecting the vicissitudes of his personality. While he was still a Beatle, Lennon and Ono recorded three albums of experimental and difficult electronic music, Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins, Unfinished Music No. 2: Life With The Lions, and Wedding Album. His first 'solo' album of popular music was Live Peace In Toronto, recorded in 1969 (prior to the breakup of the Beatles) at the Rock 'n' Roll Festival in Toronto with a Plastic Ono Band including Eric Clapton and Klaus Voormann. He also recorded three singles in his initial solo phase, the anti-war anthem Give Peace a Chance, 'Cold Turkey' (about his struggles with heroin) and 'Instant Karma!'.

Following the Beatles' split in 1970, he released the Plastic Ono Band album, a raw, honest record, heavily influenced by Arthur Janov's Primal therapy, which Lennon had undergone previously. This was followed by Imagine, his most successful solo album, which dealt with some of the same themes. The title track is a lovely song which has become an anthem for world harmony, but Lennon himself was later dismissive of it, claiming he had 'sugar coated' his message. Certainly there is irony in Lennon, a prodigious shopper, urging his fans to imagine life with 'no possessions.' 'Imagine' was Lennon's most memorable song, a song that still inspires generations of peace builders today.

Perhaps in reaction, his next album, Sometime In New York City, was loud, raucous, and explicitly political, with songs about prison riots, racial and sexual relations, the British role in the sectarian troubles in Northern Ireland, and his own problems in obtaining a United States Green Card.

Throughout his solo career, he appeared on his own albums (as well as those of other artists like Elton John) under such pseudonyms as Dr. Winston O'Boogie, Mel Torrment, and The Reverend Fred Gherkin.

Two more albums of personal songs, Mind Games and Walls And Bridges, and one of cover versions of rock and roll songs of his youth, came before 1975 when, following a fourteen-month split from Ono during which he had an extramarital affair with Ono's former secretary May Pang, he retired to concentrate on his family life.

The retirement lasted until 1980, when he and Ono produced Double Fantasy, a concept album dealing with their relationship. He also started work on Milk and Honey which he left unfinished. It was some time before Ono could bring herself to complete it.

Lennon's son with Cynthia, Julian Lennon, enjoys a notable recording career of his own, as does his son with Yoko, Sean Lennon.


Murder


People gathered the day after John Lennon's death
In the morning of December 8, 1980, in New York City, a fan described as 'obsessed' 1 (http://archives.cnn.com/2000/LAW/law.and.entertainment/10/03/chapmanparole.text.ap/), Mark David Chapman of Honolulu, Chapman had shaken hands with Sean Lennon, and John had autographed Chapman's newly-purchased copy of Double Fantasy. Chapman remained in the vicinity of the Dakota for most of the day, later sneaking into the building's carriage vestibule as a fireworks demonstration at around 9pm in nearby Central Park distracted the attentions of the doorman and passers-by in the street.

Later that evening, at 10:50 pm, Lennon and Ono returned by limousine to the apartment building from recording Ono's single 'Walking On Thin Ice' for their next album. Chapman was hiding in the carriage vestibule as Lennon and Ono got out of the car. As Lennon walked past him, Chapman called out from the darkness 'Mr. Lennon!', then moving forward pulled out a gun, which police later described as a Charter Arms .38. He assumed what witnesses called a 'combat stance'-a crouched position with gun in both hands-and fired five shots just as Lennon was turning around.

Most reliable accounts state that three of the bullets struck Lennon in the back and arm. He yelled 'I'm shot, I'm shot', and ran a few steps towards the building before collapsing in the entranceway from the vestibule. A security guard immediately called 911; Lennon remained conscious as police from a nearby station arrived within minutes, but already he was in a dire state, bleeding to death on the floor. Unable to wait for an ambulance, two officers hastily carried Lennon to the back of their squad car, reportedly hearing his bones cracking, and sped to nearby Roosevelt Hospital. One of the officers, obviously trying to help Lennon maintain consciousness, asked the dying man who he was. Lennon's final words were reported to have been 'I'm John Lennon of the Beatles', however it is more likely that the officers' initial reports are more accurate and that he simply answered 'Yeah' when asked if he was John Lennon.

Meanwhile, Chapman made no attempt to flee. He paced up and down the sidewalk reading The Catcher in the Rye until police arrived. He surrendered immediately and told the police he had acted alone. News reporters from New York's WABC interviewed one police officer who described Chapman 'as a whacko'. Other policemen referred to him as a 'local screwball'.

After arriving at the hospital, doctors worked frantically to revive the fading Lennon, resorting to massaging his heart, but to no avail. He died of cardiac arrest shortly after 11 pm as a result of having lost nearly 80% of his blood volume. Reportedly, the song playing in the hospital at the moment of Lennon's death was a Beatles hit, 'All My Loving'. A crowd was already gathering in the Roosevelt Hospital courtyard, some of the people on their knees in prayer. A young man led the Rosary.

Ono was the first to be told the news of Lennon's death, to which she reportedly remarked 'tell me it isn't true.' Later, in a press conference held in the Roosevelt Hospital courtyard, Dr. Stephan Lynn confirmed the news that John Lennon, founder of The Beatles, was dead. 'Extensive resuscitative efforts were made,' he said, 'but in spite of transfusions and many procedures, he could not be resuscitated.' Millions more would receive the sad news from Howard Cosell, commentator for ABC's Monday Night Football, as the game wrapped up that night.


Memorial
Hundreds, if not thousands of people gathered in the street outside the Dakota the night of Lennon's death. They lit candles, laid down flowers near the gate, and sang Lennon's best known songs. 'He was a symbol of peace,' one mourner said in an interview with WABC's Shelly Sonstein, 'and the whole movement of realization'. Back in the apartment, Ono was grateful to the people but sent word that their singing kept her awake; she asked that they disperse and re-convene in Central Park on the following Sunday, December 14, at 2pm EST for ten minutes of silent prayer. Her request for a silent gathering was honoured all over the world.

A special commemorative issue of Rolling Stone magazine released shortly after the murder featured as its cover a photo taken the very morning of the shooting by Annie Leibovitz. It showed a nude Lennon spooned in an embryonic pose next to a fully clothed Ono, and giving her a serene, seemingly farewell kiss as she lies on their bed. It symbolized one last time Lennon's attachement to Ono, his dependence on her, and his disregard for what others may say of their relationship. It is a poignant photograph considering the fate that would befall him hours later.

Millions of Beatles fans had thought of John Lennon almost as a second father, an older brother, or a son. His murder touched off emotional outpourings of grief around the world; some fans reportedly committed suicide upon hearing the news and it ended the hopes of millions that The Beatles would someday reunite and stage one last world tour. The Strawberry Fields Memorial was constructed in Central Park across the street from the Dakota, in memory of Lennon. It has become something of a shrine to Lennon, all the Beatles, and the cultural memory of the 1960s. When George Harrison died in 2001, people congregated on the 'Imagine' mosaic circle in Strawberry Fields.

In 1988, Warner Bros. produced a documentary film, Imagine: John Lennon (sanctioned in part by Yoko Ono). The movie was a biography of the former Beatle, featuring interviews, rarely seen musical material, and narration by Lennon himself (formed from interviews and tapes recorded by Lennon). It also introduced 'Real Love', one of the last songs composed by Lennon, in an early raw demo (a later demo would form the basis for the version rehashed by The Beatles for The Beatles Anthology). The following year, at an auction of Beatles memorabilia, Lennon's jukebox was sold at Christie's for 2,500 pounds. The Mellotron that Lennon used to record, amongst other songs, Strawberry Fields Forever, is currently owned by Trent Reznor of the band Nine Inch Nails.

Specially selected radio stations aired a syndicated series called The Lost Lennon Tapes in 1990. Hosted by Lennon publicist Elliot Mintz, the show spotlighted raw sessions from throughout Lennon's career with and without The Beatles, including rare material never released to the public. During the America: A Tribute to Heroes concert on September 21, 2001, Neil Young sang 'Imagine'. An avowed devotee of Lennon, Young's performance is considered one of the highlights of his lengthy career.

In March, 2002, his native city, Liverpool, honored his memory by renaming their airport 'Liverpool John Lennon Airport', and adopting as its motto a line from his song 'Imagine', 'Above us only sky'. In the same year, Lennon was voted 8th by the British public in the '100 Greatest Britons' poll run by the BBC. BBC History Magazine commented that his 'generational influence is immense'.

In 2004 Madonna paid tribute to Lennon by singing a cover of the song 'Imagine' during her anti-war themed 'Re-Invention World Tour'.


Biographies and books
Numerous biographies of John Lennon have been published. Notable among these are The Lives of John Lennon by Albert Goldman and Lennon: The Definitive Biography by Ray Coleman.

John Lennon wrote three books himself: A Spaniard in the Works, John Lennon: In his own write, and Skywriting by Word of Mouth. A personal sketchbook with Lennon's familiar cartoons illustrating definitions of Japanese words, Ai, was published posthumously.